Talking to Monsieur Pierre.
You want to know about books?
You want me to show you one or two books?
Oh, I'd love to see some books, yes.
No, don't worry.
They won't go third.
We'll ask you questions while I'm taking one or two books out.
The cognac is wonderful.
It's good, huh?
And you would like it.
What am I going to show you?
There's a few of my books here.
The book is just a fun like that, just to see.
So that is a nice first edition of Goya's Capitals in the Spanish original binding.
Very, very nice.
Just very fine printing.
Very beautiful.
And the copy.
And what is the year around this?
1799 or 1801, I don't remember.
Around 1800, I think 1799.
Is this a favorite book of yours?
No, I have quite a few favorite books.
A favorite, though, I mean.
No, it's just my book, just to show you.
Look at random.
This is an amusing book.
It's the first edition of Polyphilo, Hypnerturutomakias.
It's one of the very nice copies you can find in pure contemporary binding.
It has belonged to Laroš Pukovic, who is one of our great writers, just like Locke or something like that, in the Aldean contemporary binding and in very perfect condition, as you can see.
This book is more than 500 years old, right?
Yes, it's 1499.
Look at the paper.
1499, the illustration is beautiful.
It's one of the great books in my world.
Look at the condition of it.
Well, it has to be that condition otherwise it's not amusing.
Okay.
It's not amusing, you say.
Well, it should be amusing, yes.
Condition is, of course, essential.
Essential.
Condition from north, everything.
In your essay, and I've got my tape on now, so while we're talking, you use some descriptions of books I've never seen before, like a Lambda copy.
A choice card.
These are new words.
In your essay for the book collector, you used descriptions that I've never seen used before, like a lambda card.
Well, that's my question.
Four categories, yes.
I'm setting these up.
I've never seen those.
I wish that essay had been in existence while I was writing my book.
They're just my fantasy.
Okay.
Go ahead, Hindu book.
Now, what would you like to know?
Well, why don't we just have a conversation, if that's okay with you?
Why don't we have a conversation?
Yeah, go ahead.
And why don't we talk about you?
Let's have a very easy entry into the conversation.
You do originate some phrases in this essay called a lambda book, a choice book.
I guess another one is a monumental book that you use.
Well, I can't decide those four categories.
And I thought about that for some time, because the ocean of books, the immense ocean of books, which you cannot gather, you cannot measure, you cannot understand.
And then somehow you collect books, why, who, how, for how much, et cetera.
So I tried to establish those four categories,
one or two, they mingle together, but I think that, if I call all the books which have been written, which are millions, billions, of course, written, published, etc., lambda books, all the books, no books, no special books, and then amongst these, above these, excuse me, above these, of course, you hear what I call the monumental books, which are
The very great books of the world, the Book of Kells or things like that, which are monuments.
But you can find a monument in, I mean, you can, and we can, every one of us can buy a monumental book someday, because they don't need to cost, well, normally a monumental book like the Book of Kells would be worth some 30 million pounds or 20 million pounds.
a little more probably.
Then you can have for, let's say, one million or two million pounds, which is something I can't afford.
I don't know if you can, but Mr. Mellon can certainly afford, for which amount you can get a very, very beautiful apocalyptus of the 13th century or something like that.
You can have a very, very fine item.
which enter in the category of monumental books because they are parallel to nothing and they are quite exceptional.
They are unique, of course, and unique in their kind and unique in themselves.
And then you have what people, appreciation throughout the centuries,
has chosen among the lambda books, has perceived among the lambda books, among all the broad ocean of books, as some sort of, let's say, high spot.
I don't like this word very much, but there's five high spots.
It says large high spots or small high spots, which mark something, which signifies something,
And those, be they worth, let's say, 100,000 pounds or five pounds, they are significant books.
I mean, what would be a five-pound significant book?
Well, let's say the first edition of Kafka's Castle in German is worth about, I don't know, today, what's it?
No, not five pounds, but 20 pounds.
20 pounds.
It's obviously a significant book, not very important.
All right.
Well, if this had an inscription to, let's say, Thomas Mann, for instance, if it were possible, the date would allow it.
With a very chosen book, it would be at the same time a significant date, chosen book, that's all.
To Max Bride, for instance.
Excuse me?
To Max Bride would even be more interesting.
Definitely, much more.
But if you find a 13th edition,
on Mr. Kafka's castle, which is worth nothing, and it would be inscribed to the same throat, it still would be not a significant book, but a chosen book.
A chosen book.
Yes.
So I have thought a great deal about that.
I have spoken with my dear friend Felix Dorjans, whom I like very much, Roger Stoddart and Nicholas Bach, of course, and they
from how reluctantly they have somehow agreed to my category.
Reluctantly?
Well, because it was novel.
I mean, it was quite novel.
Nobody had ever thought of that.
Nobody had distinguished those categories.
And I think they mean something.
But this emerges out of a great, of a lifetime, a lifetime passion for books.
It's not a question of passion, it's not a question of passion, just a question of
of looking at books, of thinking about the mass of books.
The mass of books, you say?
Well, the mass of books, yes.
The whole mess, or mass, or whatever you want.
I mean, you have to think out, well, you see, you have six billion people.
Well, you have to think that there are 1,200 million Chinese, and then there are 250.
eighty-five million Americans, and then there are, well, you distinguish them.
So you can sort them out, and you can think of them.
Among the Americans, you have a Republican, a Democrat, or whatever.
I mean, you can make very, very, very inhuman beings, of course, and then you have men and women.
Women first, of course, and then men.
And then you can make categories like that.
So I thought that it would be interesting once in a while to make sort of categories of books.
And that I maintain.
I think it's very logical.
I mean, I can see no objective.
I have tried to hear and people have tried to express, but they didn't, they cannot, I don't think it's contradictable because I use very, very broad and very, very, very simple, very broad, very elementary notions.
I mean, it's not sophisticated at all.
I mean, lambda books, there are all the books
All the books you don't choose.
And then you have monumental books that are obvious.
I mean, the Book of Scales or any great Bible which has belonged to a king or a circle is celebrated.
At the same time, beautiful and renowned, etc.
It's a monument you can't do.
And you can't, I mean, the book I showed you is a very nice book.
That's a significant and chosen book.
See?
Both.
The Goya is also a significant book.
It's one of the...
What's a significant book?
It's a book which is a landmark.
It's a landmark which shows something which has probably always been respected from its very birth.
That's one of the characteristics of significant books.
It's very rare.
Well, sometimes you see that Gilbert's Magnet, for instance, it's a book which has been respected and sought for for many centuries.
And, well, in Copernicus's first edition, I mean, it has always been considered a very precious, important, whatever word you use, precious, important, valuable, significant, appealing to the mind, moving to the heart, anything.
I mean, it's a book which, and the important thing about the Lambda book is that you don't know anything about them that
the way to push aside the massive billions of books which exist, whereas the significant books, they are very, very, it's a very strained list, I'm explaining who made those lists, but you can add every year or every month, you can choose hundred other books which will be worth the term significant, and then you can find, every one of us can find one book which is significant, which is not
Perceived as that, generally, and from when it's taken into a great collection, be it heaven or more, or any distinguished collection, distinguished in common, well, it becomes a significant book.
When two, three, five people of repute and honest claim that it is interesting, be it a 12-pound book or a million-pound book, the same.
I mean, no difference.
The thing is, it has its certain position.
It is somehow unavoidable.
Marx, it's a landmark, exactly, be it because it's the first traditional, be it because it's the first on the stage, because it's the most beautiful among the stations, because it's a high spot in science, et cetera, marks a certain distance of invention or so.
So you've been involved with books, I think,
since the age of like 11, is this correct?
13.
And could you tell me, so you haven't lost any of your enthusiasm.
Oh, no.
Oh, no, sir.
Every day, every day, I read two, five, ten catalogs, and I look at, every day I look at, during my bloody life, I have looked at, but every day I have looked between 10 and 2,000 books the same day.
2,000.
There are days when you have actually looked at 2,000 books.
There are days.
Oh, yes, days, yes, of course.
Where you've looked at 2,000 books.
Yes.
Do your hands tell you anything?
Or is it the eye?
Can you tell about a book just by holding it?
What about, no, it's always, it's first a question of the eye.
The eye knows everything.
And, you see, when I come into a room, not a made-up room, but a
an attic room, I know exactly what there is.
And there are very, very few surprises, very few mistakes, always mistakes, very few surprises.
I mean, I know exactly what the contents are, how they are, if it's on thoughts.
I mean, if it can remain like that since, let's say, 30 or 200, better, 200 years, then I have an apprehension of the whole system of books.
But then I have to go through every one of the books.
And then, of course, I discover some things to wonder about, some disappointing points, etc.
But there are days, yes, there are days where I have handled probably more than 2,000 books a day.
But normally I handle 10, 20, 30, 50, 200 books.
And these are books you've never seen before, of course.
Oh, lots.
Every day in my life I have discovered 10 and...
hundreds of books I have never seen.
You've never heard of before, never seen, but you know instantly or you have a feeling of its importance.
I'm wondering how that happens.
Well, that's a good question.
That happens because when you, well, I'm not a musician, but I suppose that when you hear something, you can associate it with some notes or some key, key you call in English, etc.
You place a thing.
Well, when I see a book
If it's printed in the 17th century, which I see immediately, I don't need to see the date, of course, and I see even in what part of the 17th century or the 16th century it has been printed, then a sort of a recognition arises.
I see you in the subway, and then I see your head, and I say, oh, this reminds me of Nichols.
Is this Nichols?
No, it just looks like him.
And then I turn the headquarter, and I say, oh, yes, it's Nichols, okay.
And I know everything.
And that's the same with a book.
When I see a book first, well, I see how the title is written, then it comes at the same time, immediately, in the same space of seconds, four, five, ten seconds, you see a sort of identification.
You know that the book is of such part of a thought
That is a book of philosophy or a book of Joseph or a book of medicine.
And then you approach it very quickly.
You see that it's by Harvey or by the circle of Harvey.
Or then you don't know anything about it.
And then you start working on it.
Then you start working on it as the key phrase.
Because you represent something I really want to express and I hope I can do in this new book is
this tradition of the great European bookseller, which... I don't know if it's European.
I don't think... I think it's a librarianship as much as a bookseller.
Librarianship.
It's a librarianship.
It's a thing.
You have to sort the thing and to put it in its frame, in its life.
You have to understand it.
And one of the best ways, of course, is to look at it, to handle it,
to collate it and to read it.
That's a really proper way to approach.
Then you know lots of things about it.
You mentioned in the essay you describe the amateur book collector.
What is the amateur book collector and then, by contrast, who's the professional book collector?
Or is there such a thing?
You mentioned amateurs.
Well, starting, yes.
I'm sorry?
Well, the one who starts, yes.
Who starts, but a professional or somebody who has experience, I gather.
You mean, an amateur is a beginner, in other words.
In other words, it's a beginner, yes.
I didn't use the word amateur.
I think so, right.
It's a bad translation.
Well, amateur has a double meaning, probably, in English, too.
Anyhow, in French, it has two meanings at the same time of the occasional one, or the one who loves.
Amateurs come from Amare, the lover in every sense of the word, the one who sleeps with it, who lives with the book.
And you have to sleep to fuck the book.
Excuse me.
I mean, you have to go through it.
We might change that to say make love.
Is that okay?
With your permission.
I don't like the word make love.
No, I don't like the other word.
I don't like, I'm not a strong term.
But make love is a way you've got to love.
So more noble, so more important, so more complicated.
But I'm amazed that you use that context for a book.
Because then it really is passion, isn't it?
You described a passionate act to describe the communion with the book.
I'm wondering where that comes from in science.
It's a way of handling them.
Potatoes are the same thing.
You peel potatoes and then you cook them.
First you choose them by sight.
You go to a market, you see potatoes, you choose them by sight.
By experience, of course, also.
You see that they are the good quality of the pink ones you don't like, the yellow ones you like, the white ones are more delicate and have less flavor.
You buy them, then you peel them, and then you cook them, or you cook them while peeling, then you taste them, then you put butter, et cetera, put salt and pepper, et cetera.
It's the same thing.
I mean, you have to proceed to think.
You have to be complete about it.
In love, it's the same thing.
You have to look at the lady, and then to smile to her, and then to see that you are not rebuked.
And then you have to be humble, and then you have to be brave, and not to be afraid of a lady, etc., etc.
It's a long process for a merited woman.
What is the greatest satisfaction for you, the greatest pleasure that you get as a bookman?
Good question.
very numerous, the establishment of the book.
I mean, where I really identify the book and its story, when the book is familiar and clear to me.
And the more uncommon novel it is to be, the more fun I have in discovery and describing.
You see, in my profession,
Everything ends with a description.
My descriptions are very, very long, perhaps too long sometimes, but they are very thorough.
I hope that they are very thorough.
They always follow a certain line which I tried to describe.
Well, lack of space, I couldn't describe entirely.
But you see, booksellers or book dealers, let's say, etc.,
Well, many people sell books.
They look at bibliographies, which should not be called bibliographies, all of them.
I try to explain this.
That's a long story also.
But they look at books.
They take some books like Carter, John Carter, or any other.
And they say, oh, this is the first edition.
It's worth 10 pounds.
Well, I never do that.
And it has 48 pages plus a two-page number.
I never do that, you see.
I never look at bibliography, or a reference book rather, especially which I prefer, before having finished my tour, my promenade with the book.
You see, so I look at the book, I enjoy looking it, or I disagree with it with tight face or so, and then I make a tour of it, and then I make a collation, then I see the height and the broadness, and then I read it somehow,
not perhaps in total, but I read sufficiently.
I'm a publisher also, so I have a certain habit of reading quickly, at least at getting a flavor, a real flavor, some understanding of a book.
Of course, I start collating, which means that I know there are two or three books bound together in there.
in a group, etc.
In 16th-century or 15th-century books, very often two or three works bound together, so you never know by which you have to start your description, which is the most interesting, etc.
I don't give a darn about finances.
I give the same care, you see, since many, many years,
25, 30 years, I have a bad habit of giving the same amount of my time, which I don't have, for a 20-pound book.
Really?
Oh, really, definitely.
I'll spend the same time.
No, I'll spend sometimes much more time because a 20-pound book or 25-pound book, I knew nothing about it.
Many times, if it happened to myself, because I wouldn't buy a 25-pound book, I would need them.
Whereas a 5,000-pound book, well, I can't say that I know none of all of them, but I have met or seen, traded, seen, met, heard of, well, a great majority of them.
So, I mean, you can't... You're familiar with them.
Well, I'm very familiar with them, yes.
Even if I don't know them, I mean, an unknown broadside on a voyage in the 18th century or an unknown four-pages or eight-pages pamphlet of the 15th century or 16th century, I immediately understand where it stands and what it's about.
The significance.
Well, if it is significant or not.
Exactly, but where...
So actually your curiosity is sharpened more by the book that might be regarded as a lambda book, I guess.
No, no, I can't tell.
I don't make any distinction.
I do my job, which is a gardener's job, which is a curator's job.
I'm a gardener and a curator.
to read the book and to read it.
Do you still do all the descriptions yourself?
All.
All?
You write all the descriptions yourself?
All the descriptions myself.
Sometimes, from time to time, I have somebody who makes a collation, but always on the book, not reference books.
And then, after all, I allow that reference book to be consulted, because if you have a complicated book,
17th century illustrated books, etc., where you don't really know if it has 47 plates or 52, etc., then I find 47 plates, and he finds 47 plates, and I say, now let's check what the Berliner Museum says about that book, how many they have, etc.
And I check the bibliography, of course.
And then I check, and then I check, I have an extremely, I have
many thousands or tens of thousands of cards which I have made out of my descriptions of reputable colleague descriptions and I check if I have forgotten anything and then if there is something to be quoted by somebody who then I say who did that.
I never cite my references except they be appropriate.
I mean I don't cite the British Anticlipiator nor LaRousse nor Brunet nor
or so I mean that's the knowledge of everybody just as the spelling of the word is your possession and you don't say I spell that word spelling with two L's and I-N-G because it's in the dictionary I don't refer to my source but when my source comes
When my source comes from me, I don't say it.
And of course, it's obvious, but when my source comes from Querish's, which is very rare, but from E.P.
Goldsmith, which can come sometimes, or from Er Weill, I say, as Mr. Weill said, of course.
Well, is this pride?
You say you don't look at references prior to doing writing your own research?
Oh, never.
And then you look at it.
So this must be professional pride at work here.
No, it's safety.
I mean, I don't want to be a fool.
I mean, I don't want to... But you're trusting your judgment more than the published reference, then?
No, no, I don't find any, nor my, nor published reference as certain.
Absolutely not.
You can absolutely not know.
No, if you read some of my... No, you can never know what...
I'll give you an example, for instance.
In a sale which I conducted 15 days ago, May 28th, I came from Italy two, well, three or four, but there were two extremely rare Italian books of the 16th century, which more or less obscene, obscene the sense of it.
16 then, especially the 19th century.
They were not very obscene to how many of the lady could hear of them very easily.
But they were extremely rare, and neither were really well described, and I couldn't find a reference to any copy.
And for some reason, since they were Italian, etc.,
I looked at first in what his name, two volumes, start with a C, who had all the books.
And then I went to Libri.
And Libri, not surprisingly, had both books.
And in both cases, in both cases, it's interesting, I cited the things I... This is Libri, the famous Libri.
Yes, famous Libri, who was a genius and a thief.
and a scoundrel, a scoundrel, and an absolute genius.
I've never heard him described as a genius, but that's... Absolute genius.
Well, read that fabulous book which has been... No, I have to forget it before we go home.
It's supposed to be... Oh, it's a fantastic book.
It's not available in the States.
It's not available in the States?
No, no.
Well, I'll give you the... But you know, I'll try and get it tomorrow.
It's a biography of Count Libri, Guillermo Libri, the great book.
Guillermo.
But I always knew that she was a genius.
because I tell you how you can know the key genius, you just have to read the preface, which is published in French and English, to, I think, 1859, Catalogue of a Libre Sale at Solveig.
And there you have the first insight, you have the first perception, you have the first feeling of book collection.
She's the first one in that silly, stupid 19th century where you have two great books,
gatherers of books, two great handlers of books, which is Mr. Phillips and Mr. Libri.
You put Libri in Phillips' company.
That's amazing.
Well, there are two... Well, I'll tell you why.
Because both of them... He robbed your country, for God's sake.
Well, he robbed my country.
Well, we'll come back to that.
I don't defend him, although many distinguished people.
You're Mr. Panizzi.
You're great Mr. Panizzi.
He's British.
I'm American.
Yes.
Well, anyhow, Panizzi and my great-poster, Meremie, went to defend him.
I'm not defending him.
I'm admiring his personality, and I'm desperate about him.
I'm very sorry for him.
I pity him for him being such a scoundrel and such a stupid man.
And I wonder where, as you say in crime story, search a woman.
Cherche Lafemme.
I wonder what happened to his life.
Was it his mother or his mistress or his not-mistress or his boyfriend or what it was.
But something, something occurred which... He needed money.
That he lost a set of morals.
He was a genius, obviously.
I mean, that's...
that's evident from everything.
And to come back to what I was starting to tell you, just read that essay, and you will just admit that in the 19th century, from 50 to 1875, you had two persons who gathered millions, well, not millions, but hundreds of thousands of books, who both bought them, mind you, the books he stole, I don't know how many they were,
But he bought an enormous quantity of books also.
And he bought books at the time.
You know, I bought for five pounds in the 1930s when I started at Mags.
What I bought for five pounds or ten pounds, which was much money for me and quite a deal for Mr. Mags, you cannot have an idea what you could get at that time.
And what in France for three francs,
You could get a northern sailor for 20 francs.
You got a beautiful book.
Well, of course, the significant books, the books which were known as valuable, they were always expensive.
But you got many books for nothing.
And Mr. Libri was the one who understood that buying for 5 francs or 50 cents, which you could also find a book of the 16th century which has the silliness of somebody,
was some extraordinary.
And he explained to you all that story, and he says what a fourth-century manuscript means to the civilization.
And nobody wrote that.
So I refer you to that essay, to that preface.
1859, if I'm not wrong, if I'm not mistaken, the first library great catalog of octavo, large octavo, at Sowerby's first sale.
If you don't find it, I'll send you...
But he's a contemporary of Philip's too, which is interesting.
Exactly contemporary.
So one was a stupid idiot who bought books and who sat on them, who showed them to nobody and who understood nothing.
Another one was a clever, fine man who understood, who loved them, who was passionate of them, and who loved them.
And then he stopped, I don't know, I'm not defending him as absurd, of course, because it's immoral and absurd, etc.
But he started buying books for five pence or francs.
It's obvious you admire his passion and his knowledge, though.
That's pretty obvious.
His knowledge is fantastic.
See, he wrote the best book on mathematics.
1854, I think, four volumes.
It's still one of the best books in the history of mathematics.
He's taught mathematics here at the Chauvin, I think.
Of course, Collège de France, which is still better.
He was a great, great learned man, and he was a diplomat, he was everything.
He was a friend to the kings, etc.
He was an extraordinary man.
And you say Cherchez La Femme, that's the answer.
Cherchez La Femme, well, that's a gap, obviously.
That's probably the gap, or maybe his mother, or she wasn't brought down.
He needed money, is what it comes to.
No, because I don't, no, no, I'm not, it's obviously not a question of money.
No, he got all the money he wanted, because, no, he didn't really need money, because first he hadn't had any needs, he lived very soberly,
And then because he, no, no, he didn't use any money, he just got involved in that, you see, and I can very well not follow him, but understand, not excuse him, but understand how it went.
You see, he, you see, I have seen that in the 19, I started in 19, what, 31, so I have seen all that in the 1935 or 40, you see, if I would go in a provincial town
I would be able to buy for a few pennies or francs a fine 16th century book, which could absolvously, not necessarily, be a very rare, important book, which absolutely the dealer, the antiquarian, who would be a bookseller, would have no knowledge of reference books, would get the idea.
I never found the first folio of Shakespeare, and I never found a part of Shakespeare,
which would be still more, because I don't see why one wouldn't find in attics quarters of Shakespeare, etc.
Well, I never found anything of that sort, except in the 19th century I found great things.
But, you see, in the field of manuscripts and of painted books, you could obviously, certainly...
in the 1830s, 1850s, 1880s, you see, Mary May, who was not a thief at all, was an extremely, extremely rigid and very strict man, a wonderful person, he was inspector to the monument, Mary May, Prospero Mary May.
And he tells you, or I tell you, when I was 15 or 16 years old, I went to an official
in Florence.
What did I see?
I asked to see some drawings.
I like drawing.
And they put me in a room.
And there were packages of drawings, of all drawings, not of da Vinci, but of the 17th century, of 18th century, beautiful drawings, which would be worth 10, 12, 1,000 pounds each or so.
And they were just there.
And I was a youngster, and I could, I could, of course, take anything in my pocket, and I could, and I could, and I
and I could tear it away.
They were just here for us.
At the Albertina, they started refusing to give the original drawings.
I don't know, it's Mr, what's his name, the great, oh, you know his name, well, the great curator who started that, but Alpina.
You were handed the Rembrandt and the Dürer drawings, and of course the later ones, as you wanted.
This is the 1930s now.
That's the 1930s.
But what happened in the 1830s when I wasn't yet there?
It's something quite different.
You see, so I was in a provincial town.
You go to a marketplace or so, they could sell you
Spoils of wonderful manuscripts.
Now listen, ten years ago, only ten years ago, eight years ago, I purchased, as Mr. Guter did, as Mr. Quirk did, as three or four people did, I purchased four or five of the most beautiful miniatures of apocalypses in that sale at Sotheby's.
Do you remember that sale of all the cuttings which that man in the 1820s or 1830s made?
They were the most fabulous thing.
The apocalypses, you see, I have in my other flat with all my belongings.
I have one of the most beautiful ones.
You see, it's incredible what you put... Well, that I paid, I don't know, 2,000 pounds 10 years ago, you see.
It's a monument by itself.
It's only one horse.
It's a monument.
So, you see...
The value of things, the appreciation of things, has so much varied since, well, the great move, except, of course, for the significant things, drawings or so.
I mean, you could never buy a very fine print by Rembrandt.
You could never, even in 1860s or 1880s, it had a value.
It was a significant thing.
But for Van Mekkonen, you see, which is much more important, who nobody knew, you can always buy it for very cheap.
And to come again to the end of my story, in the provinces, in the remote places, you could find miniature, and I'm sure that the thing started that way, that he came to a town.
And he bought a book for five francs.
It was a nice book concept.
He said, now do you have anything else?
Oh, yes, would say the old man.
Yes, I see, yes.
And the church, they have some leaves.
Would you like to have some?
And he would go to the priest and say, now would you like to have ten francs for your...
wine, mass wine or something like that?
Oh, yes, he said, well, I don't care about that.
You know very well that.
I mean, it's just the same story as Mr. Cook's natives exchanging beautiful works of art against coals or beautiful coals against nothing, stones, etc.
It's the same thing.
Things had no value.
You see, nobody knew, at Phillips' time, Mr. Phillips knew nothing about his belongings.
Well, Mr. Libri, he knew exactly what he had.
Sometimes, I come back to the story of Mr. Libri and the reference books to finish the story because I'm going too far in every direction.
So I finished, you see, so he could.
And then, of course, he bought things which had been stolen by other people than him.
And then he went to the library because he was connected with librarians because he was a scholar, a different scholar.
And so they would tell him, oh, you want to see?
And just as I was in front of a drawing in the office where I didn't take anyone away, nor spoiled any of them, he would say, well, hell, they don't care.
Well, I'll cut this leaf out and give them, well, that's very abominable.
But I think that's the sea.
And I'm sure he didn't make it for money.
And then, of course, he committed abominable things because he falsified, etc.
But that's the smallest side of the story.
To come to one of his bad traits, again, I'm defending him as something also, for these two rare books, I went to the Libri catalogue and I found his copies of the two books, because he had great rarities, because he knew what rare books were, and he chased them, and he had them.
So in the fourth or third sale of Libri, where there are all Italian books, I found my two books.
And as I say in my catalogue, which I published,
Tell us when it's getting late for you, Pierre.
Tell us when it's getting late for you and you want us to go.
No, sir, I will in a few minutes.
Anyhow, so I explained the story.
Mr. Liebrich had a copy of each of them which was incomplete.
And so he tried to explain very cleverly that it seemed incomplete because it stopped at page 22 and it shouldn't have 24 pages, but it was all right like that.
So I said in my description, the copies I had to sell were perfect.
And after I had collated them, I checked, and I said, as Mr. Libri, a genius and a crook, and a wretch crook, very stupidly, very stupidly and very viciously, explaining his catalog, his copy, and the collations, and such and such.
You see, so... Let's go back to, you say, 13 years old when you became... What happened?
What caused you to become...
What happened, that I was wandering through, that I lived near the Fontaine Carpeau, which is near the observatoire in Paris, and I went to the Lucille Goubron, which is a great college, and I walked there most times, and I went through a bookshop at which I stopped, and I saw books, and I looked at the dirty books, as you do at 13 years old,
And then I had a pal who sat on the same bank, and one day he took out of his pocket a book, a tiny little 17th century book, a blau or LDB or so, and he said, now look about that.
Oh, yes, well, I paid that 25 cents, which was part of farming also.
And I said, oh, well, and that's what brought me to books.
Because I had the feeling, I had the emotion to think that whereas there is no monument, no painting, which is intact since the 20th century, and that pointed me to think, to start to think about it.
That was really the extreme lambda book.
But this lambda book, you see, it couldn't by no means be brought
into the significant titling because there was nothing.
It was perhaps even an odd book, an odd volume of a series, but still, I had, you can have tomorrow for 50 cents today, 15 cents of an American dollar, you can still have for that amount of money an object which is of the 16th or 17th century, which is intact.
which is intact and which shows you at its height civilization.
You see, early printing, early setting, early binding, intact, and the thought of people transmitted by that.
Explain that to Mr. Cave no more.
No high spots.
I mean, you don't have to have a high spot to jump of enthusiasm at the sight of a book.
That's all.
End of the story.
And then you say in your essay that books can sit unread for centuries waiting to come alive.
Exactly.
I love that.
And they're waiting for somebody to discover them, aren't they?
Exactly.
And they're here.
You have to discover them every day.
That's why I always look at my ten or two thousand books.
Two thousand, yes, certainly.
There are days where I look but more without soul.
Looked at soul, not collated.
I know this is a naive question, but can you think of some of your most exciting discoveries, some of your most exciting moments with books, something that was totally unexpected and yet so thoroughly absorbing?
Every day, everything.
No, I don't know.
You see, I'm not Casanova, you see.
You're no Casanova.
No, I'm no Casanova.
I mean, I respect books and I respect women, and I mean, there's no tableau de chasse.
No, no, no, you see.
And then it's different to me.
I mean, I have the same pleasure.
I don't have the same profit, but I don't care.
I have enough money to live now.
It's all right.
I have enough to buy my big steak for two days or three days, so it's all right.
But you see, I like what is there, the meaning of the book, what it says.
I mean, it's my job...
as a tutor to book, as a librarian, as a, I don't know, as a servant of a book to analyze, to bring it to life and to render it its honor and to, I don't know.
Let's talk briefly and then we, because I know it's getting late, but we haven't discussed, because I think it is another very important aspect of what you do, is that you're a publisher.
Well, that's something quite different.
But it's quite different, but nevertheless it does represent... That's a creative word.
That's a creative word.
I'm a publisher, but I'm a very exacting publisher.
I'll give you a catalog of my publishing company if I have it here.
I'm creating books.
I'm commissioning books.
I very rarely publish a manuscript which is bought.
When I publish it, I alter it.
I have a shoot with many authors, and then they bless me after that.
They're happy.
You mean you change the text?
Oh, yes, of everything.
What are you not supposed to do there?
Even scientific books in which I understand nothing.
I understand nothing.
So why did you change them then?
To make them better.
You see, in my publishing company, there is in the waiting room, there is on gold, printed in gold, a sentence from Erasmus's writing.
which I don't know by heart, which is translated in French, which renders something like there is no man who is good enough not to be improved, not to be embettered, and there is no book which is not worth being rendered better.
And that's from Erasmus.
That's from Erasmus.
Yes, sir.
The world's first great professional writer.
And so that's my motto in the publishing company.
So when I don't... You see, when I publish a book by a chemist or a mathematician, I know nothing about it.
But I have three instances, four instances, four episodes.
I first look at the man.
what he looks like, what he smells like, what's inside of him.
I have my opinion on that.
And then I see his writing, be he's writing in hand or he's writing on computer, the way it presents what it looks like.
And that's very easy.
I mean, you know 60% of a book by that first sight, of course, carefully.
So there are many books I would really have to look at more, two pages, to send the usual, very polite, very kind, and encouraging letter.
And then you have, and then I'm attracted to a book.
That's a book which I have sent to me.
And then, but a commission book is the same.
And then I will send the book to two or three referees, and I'll see their opinion, how it's there.
And then I'll talk to them again.
Then I'll talk, then if I'm interested in the book, in the book, etc., then I'll do my small part of a job for a scientific book in which I did nothing.
I'll just change his titles to make them more legible, more understandable, more appealing, and I'll change perhaps the order of chapters, etc.
I mean, common sense.
But you're not editing the content, so to speak, if it's mathematics and science.
You're not changing his conclusions.
I leave all the blondes to him.
I mean, I have taken my responsibility by referees, so I know the theories sound.
No, my books, my scientific books are excellent.
But my interference is very small and superficial, let's say, in scientific books, but it's really, it's still very heavy.
Whereas in literary books or historical books or art books, my interference is very, very, very heavy.
Are you trying to create books that will last as long as the other books that you... Well, no, I never thought of that.
I'm trying to do books that will not be spoiled in two, five, ten years.
I'm trying to book... Well, in both senses, I mean physically and intellectually.
I'm trying to publish books which will last for some time.
Yes, definitely.
Carly, I think we've... Yes, I'll give you... The press is named for a famous scientist, I think.
Isn't that right?
You name your press... This is Hermann?
Yes.
That's the name of the company.
Is that the name?
But who is Hermann?
Was that... Well, it was... I knew nothing of him.
I explained it.
Oh, that was an individual.
Yes, okay.
I didn't know him.
He died in 1910, I think.
I see.
And he found the company in 1900.
You have no feeling about computers.
To talk about computers and the future fate of books, I don't know what is going to happen to them.
I hope nothing bad.
But I don't see how you can escape
You won't burn monumental books, and you can't get rid of the Delta books.
And you can't also, I mean, the four categories I tried to establish, you can't escape them, because significant books will always remain even if they disappear.
They still will exist.
I mean, first is Copernicus in 1543, the date where appeared two great books,
The Vesalus and the Copernicus.
The same year.
There's a third one, a secret book.
I think it's in Agricola or something like that.
Or below, I don't remember.
Anyhow, these two are the same year.
So they're high-spotted.
I don't care.
I'm not Mr. Haven anymore.
I don't care if they are worth this or that.
But what I'm interested in is that they are valuable, not in monetary sense, but in the real world.
They're valuable books.
And they will remain that even if you only feel yourself compelled to get a facsimile of them, which means that they're something, they're a monument.
They're significant.
Okay.
And then the chosen book, well, you can't avoid that if you have an inscription from Mr. I don't know, T.S.
Eliot to Mr. Lawrence.
Well, it's a very exciting book, a choice book, whatever the book is.
That's all.
Well, you're getting the book for the inscription and not the content of the book.
At that point, it's the inscription that matters and not the content of the book.
That is a chosen book.
A chosen book.
A ten-pence book, which is chosen by the thing that exists in the extraordinary inscription, is chosen.
If it's the first edition of
It's a significant group.
Then it's better.
All that is explained.
And then you say also that you feel that the collector is an endangered species.
Not the collector, the collection.
The libraries, the great libraries, yes.
Great libraries, yes.
They're going to disappear.
They may be.
I mean, it's difficult nowadays.
Well, you see, Mr. Heaven and More is a sad example.
It's very difficult.
We have collectors, they sell their collection very quickly.
Mr. Hawkman just sold his botanical books that he bought at Belger, 20 years ago, 15 years ago.
He didn't keep them.
Why did he buy them?
Why did he sell them?
I don't know.
But, I mean, that's not a book collector.
Mr. Libri didn't do that.
He kept them for years and years.
Mr. Phillips killed more.
Without asking you to get up, you were going to give me the title of the Libri book?
the title of the publisher.
So I can get it, I'll get it in London.